how old is the earth well by counting
the number of isotopes in a sample of
rock that's undergone radioactive decay
geologists have estimated the Earth's
birthday when it first formed from a
solar nebula to be 4.6 billion years ago
but just how long is that really
here are some analogies that might help
you understand for example let's imagine
the entire history of earth until the
present day as a single calendar year on
January 1st the earth begins to form by
March 3rd there's the first evidence of
single-celled bacteria life remains
amazingly unicellular until November
11th when the first multicellular
organisms known as the Ediacaran fauna
come along shortly thereafter on
November 16th at 6:08 p.m. is the
Cambrian explosion of life a major
milestone when all of the modern phyla
started to appear on December 10th at
1:26 p.m. the dinosaurs first evolved
but are wiped out by an asteroid just 2
weeks later on December 31st the mighty
Roman Empire rises and falls in just
under 4 seconds and Columbus sets sail
for what he thinks is India at 3 seconds
to midnight if you tried to write the
history of the earth using just one page
per year your book would be 145 miles
thick more than half the distance to the
International Space Station the story of
the 3.2 million year-old
australopithecine fossil known as Lucy
would be found on the 144th mile just
over 500 feet from the end of the book
the United States of America's
Declaration of Independence would be
signed in the last half-inch or if we
compare geologic time to a woman
stretching her arms to a span of six
feet the simple act of filing her nails
would wipe away all of recorded human
history
finally let's imagine the history of the
earth as your life from the moment
you're born to your first day of high
school
your first word first time sitting up
and first time walking would all take
place while life on Earth was comprised
of single-celled organisms in fact the
first multicellular organism wouldn't
evolve until you were 12 years old and
starting seventh grade
right around the time your science
teacher is telling the class how fossils
are formed the dinosaurs don't appear
until three months into eighth grade and
are soon wiped out right around spring
break
three days before ninth grade begins
when you realize summer is over and you
need new school supplies Lucy the
australopithecine is walking around
Africa as you finish breakfast and head
outside to catch your bus 44 minutes
before school
the Neanderthals are going extinct
throughout Europe the most recent
glacial period ends is your bus drops
you off 16 minutes before class Columbus
set sail 50 seconds before classes
you're still trying to find the right
classroom the Declaration of
Independence is signed 28 seconds later
as you look for an empty seat and you
are born 1.3 seconds before the bell
rings so you see the earth is extremely
unbelievably old compared to us humans
with the fossil record hiding incredible
stories to tell us about the past and
possibly the future as well but in the
short time we've been here we've learned
so much and will surely learn more over
the next decades and centuries mere
moments in geological time
Oh